Detect Thoughts
2nd-level (divination; arcane, senses, telepathy)
Classes: Bard, sorcerer, wizard
Casting Time: 1 action
Range: Special (30-foot radius)
Target: Self
Components: V, S, M (copper piece)
Duration: Concentration (1 minute)
Saving Throw: Wisdom (special)
On the round you cast it, and as an action on
subsequent turns until the spell ends, you can probe
a creature’s mind to read its thoughts by focusing on
one creature you can see within range. The creature
makes a Wisdom saving throw. Creatures with an
Intelligence score of 3 or less or that don’t speak any
languages are unaffected. On a failed save, you learn
the creature’s surface thoughts—what is most on
its mind in that moment. On a successful save, you
fail to read the creature’s thoughts and can’t attempt
to probe its mind for the duration. Conversation
naturally shapes the course of a creature’s thoughts
and what it is thinking about may change based on
questions verbally directed at it.
Once you have read a creature’s surface thoughts,
you can use an action to probe deeper into its mind.
The creature makes a second Wisdom saving throw.
On a successful save, you fail to read the creature’s
deeper thoughts and the spell ends. On a failure, you
gain insight into the creature’s motivations, emotional
state, and something that looms large in its mind.
The creature then becomes aware you are probing its
mind and can use an action to make an Intelligence
check contested by your Intelligence check, ending
the spell if it succeeds.
Additionally, you can use an action to scan for
thinking creatures within range that you can’t see.
Once you detect the presence of a thinking creature,
so long as it remains within range you can attempt
to read its thoughts as described above (even if you
can’t see it).
The spell penetrates most barriers but is blocked
by 2 feet of stone, 2 inches of common metal, or a
thin sheet of lead.
Cast at Higher Levels. When using a 5th-level spell
slot, increase the spell’s range to 1 mile. When using
a 7th-level spell slot, increase the range to 10 miles.
When using a 9th-level spell slot, increase the range
to 1,000 miles.
Rare: Diogenes’ Specific Detect Thoughts. You can
scan the thoughts of all creatures within range
and locate one creature currently thinking about
a single subject you choose when you cast the
spell. You can read its thoughts as described in
the spell’s description. This spell does not reveal
the creature having these thoughts, and until you
determine which creature it is you cannot shape
the course of its thoughts so the information you
receive may be limited.